. Over hill , over dale , Thorough bush , thorough brier , Over park , over pale , Thorough flood , thorough fire ! I do wander everywhere , Swifter than the moon's sphere; And I serve the Fairy Queen , To dew her orbs upon the green; The cowslips tall her pensioners be; In their gold coats spots you see; Those be rubies , fairy favours; In those freckles live their savours; I must go seek some dewdrops here , And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear . FROM off a hill whose concave womb reworded A plaintful story from a sistering vale , My spirits to attend this double voice accorded , And down I laid to list the sad-tuned tale; Ere long espied a fickle maid full pale , Tearing of papers , breaking rings a-twain , Storming her world with sorrow's wind and rain . Upon her head a platted hive of straw , Which fortified her visage from the sun , Whereon the thought might think sometime it saw The carcass of beauty spent and done: Time had not scythed all that youth begun , Nor youth all quit; but , spite of heaven's fell rage , Some beauty peep'd through lattice of sear'd age . Oft did she heave her napkin to her eyne , Which on it had conceited characters , Laundering the silken figures in the brine That season'd woe had pelleted in tears , And often reading what contents it bears; As often shrieking undistinguish'd woe , In clamours of all size , both high and low . Sometimes her levell'd eyes their carriage ride , As they did battery to the spheres intend; Sometime diverted their poor balls are tied To the orbed earth; sometimes they do extend Their view right on; anon their gazes lend To every place at once , and , nowhere fix'd , The mind and sight distractedly commix'd . Her hair , nor loose nor tied in formal plat , Proclaim'd in her a careless hand of pride For some , untuck'd , descended her sheaved hat , Hanging her pale and pined cheek beside; Some in her threaden fillet still did bide , And true to bondage would not break from thence , Though slackly braided in loose negligence . A thousand favours from a maund she drew Of amber , crystal , and of beaded jet , Which one by one she in a river threw , Upon whose weeping margent she was set; Like usury , applying wet to wet , Or monarch's hands that let not bounty fall Where want cries some , but where excess begs all . Of folded schedules had she many a one , Which she perused , sigh'd , tore , and gave the flood; Crack'd many a ring of posied gold and bone Bidding them find their sepulchres in mud; Found yet moe letters sadly penn'd in blood , With sleided silk feat and affectedly Enswathed , and seal'd to curious secrecy . These often bathed she in her fluxive eyes , And often kiss'd , and often 'gan to tear: Cried 'O false blood , thou register of lies , What unapproved witness dost thou bear ! Ink would have seem'd more black and damned here !' This said , in top of rage the lines she rents , Big discontent so breaking their contents . A reverend man that grazed his cattle nigh-- Sometime a blusterer , that the ruffle knew Of court , of city , and had let go by The swiftest hours , observed as they flew-- Towards this afflicted fancy fastly drew , And , privileged by age , desires to know In brief the grounds and motives of her woe . So slides he down upon his grained bat , And comely-distant sits he by her side; When he again desires her , being sat , Her grievance with his hearing to divide: If that from him there may be aught applied Which may her suffering ecstasy assuage , Tis promised in the charity of age . Father , she says , though in me you behold The injury of many a blasting hour , Let it not tell your judgment I am old; Not age , but sorrow , over me hath power: I might as yet have been a spreading flower , Fresh to myself , If I had self-applied Love to myself and to no love beside . But , woe is me ! too early I attended A youthful suit--it was to gain my grace-- Of one by nature's outwards so commended , That maidens' eyes stuck over all his face: Love lack'd a dwelling , and made him her place; And when in his fair parts she did abide , She was new lodged and newly deified . His browny locks did hang in crooked curls; And every light occasion of the wind Upon his lips their silken parcels hurls . What's sweet to do , to do will aptly find: Each eye that saw him did enchant the mind , For on his visage was in little drawn What largeness thinks in Paradise was sawn . Small show of man was yet upon his chin; His phoenix down began but to appear Like unshorn velvet on that termless skin Whose bare out-bragg'd the web it seem'd to wear: Yet show'd his visage by that cost more dear; And nice affections wavering stood in doubt If best were as it was , or best without . His qualities were beauteous as his form , For maiden-tongued he was , and thereof free; Yet , if men moved him , was he such a storm As oft 'twixt May and April is to see , When winds breathe sweet , untidy though they be . His rudeness so with his authorized youth Did livery falseness in a pride of truth . Well could he ride , and often men would say That horse his mettle from his rider takes: Proud of subjection , noble by the sway , What rounds , what bounds , what course , what stop he makes !' And controversy hence a question takes , Whether the horse by him became his deed , Or he his manage by the well-doing steed . But quickly on this side the verdict went: His real habitude gave life and grace To appertainings and to ornament , Accomplish'd in himself , not in his case: All aids , themselves made fairer by their place , Came for additions; yet their purposed trim Pieced not his grace , but were all graced by him . So on the tip of his subduing tongue All kinds of arguments and question deep , All replication prompt , and reason strong , For his advantage still did wake and sleep: To make the weeper laugh , the laugher weep , He had the dialect and different skill , Catching all passions in his craft of will: That he did in the general bosom reign Of young , of old; and sexes both enchanted , To dwell with him in thoughts , or to remain In personal duty , following where he haunted: Consents bewitch'd , ere he desire , have granted; And dialogued for him what he would say , Ask'd their own wills , and made their wills obey . 'Many there were that did his picture get , To serve their eyes , and in it put their mind; Like fools that in th' imagination set The goodly objects which abroad they find Of lands and mansions , theirs in thought assign'd; And labouring in moe pleasures to bestow them Than the true gouty landlord which doth owe them: So many have , that never touch'd his hand , Sweetly supposed them mistress of his heart . My woeful self , that did in freedom stand , And was my own fee-simple , not in part , What with his art in youth , and youth in art , Threw my affections in his charmed power , Reserved the stalk and gave him all my flower . Yet did I not , as some my equals did , Demand of him , nor being desired yielded; Finding myself in honour so forbid , With safest distance I mine honour shielded: Experience for me many bulwarks builded Of proofs new-bleeding , which remain'd the foil Of this false jewel , and his amorous spoil . But , ah , who ever shunn'd by precedent The destined ill she must herself assay ? Or forced examples , 'gainst her own content , To put the by-past perils in her way ? Counsel may stop awhile what will not stay; For when we rage , advice is often seen By blunting us to make our wits more keen . Nor gives it satisfaction to our blood , That we must curb it upon others' proof; To be forbod the sweets that seem so good , For fear of harms that preach in our behoof . O appetite , from judgment stand aloof ! The one a palate hath that needs will taste , Though Reason weep , and cry , 'It is thy last .' For further I could say 'This man's untrue ,' And knew the patterns of his foul beguiling; Heard where his plants in others' orchards grew , Saw how deceits were gilded in his smiling; Knew vows were ever brokers to defiling; Thought characters and words merely but art , And bastards of his foul adulterate heart . And long upon these terms I held my city , Till thus he gan besiege me: 'Gentle maid , Have of my suffering youth some feeling pity , And be not of my holy vows afraid: That's to ye sworn to none was ever said; For feasts of love I have been call'd unto , Till now did ne'er invite , nor never woo . All my offences that abroad you see Are errors of the blood , none of the mind; Love made them not: with acture they may be , Where neither party is nor true nor kind: They sought their shame that so their shame did find; And so much less of shame in me remains , By how much of me their reproach contains . Among the many that mine eyes have seen , Not one whose flame my heart so much as warm'd , Or my affection put to the smallest teen , Or any of my leisures ever charm'd: Harm have I done to them , but ne'er was harm'd; Kept hearts in liveries , but mine own was free , And reign'd , commanding in his monarchy . Look here , what tributes wounded fancies sent me , Of paled pearls and rubies red as blood; Figuring that they their passions likewise lent me Of grief and blushes , aptly understood In bloodless white and the encrimson'd mood; Effects of terror and dear modesty , Encamp'd in hearts , but fighting outwardly . And , lo , behold these talents of their hair , With twisted metal amorously impleach'd , I have received from many a several fair , Their kind acceptance weepingly beseech'd , With the annexions of fair gems enrich'd , And deep-brain'd sonnets that did amplify Each stone's dear nature , worth , and quality . The diamond ,--why , 'twas beautiful and hard , Whereto his invised properties did tend; The deep-green emerald , in whose fresh regard Weak sights their sickly radiance do amend; The heaven-hued sapphire and the opal blend With objects manifold: each several stone , With wit well blazon'd , smiled or made some moan . Lo , all these trophies of affections hot , Of pensived and subdued desires the tender , Nature hath charged me that I hoard them not , But yield them up where I myself must render , That is , to you , my origin and ender; For these , of force , must your oblations be , Since I their altar , you enpatron me . O , then , advance of yours that phraseless hand , Whose white weighs down the airy scale of praise; Take all these similes to your own command , Hallow'd with sighs that burning lungs did raise; What me your minister , for you obeys , Works under you; and to your audit comes Their distract parcels in combined sums . Lo , this device was sent me from a nun , Or sister sanctified , of holiest note; Which late her noble suit in court did shun , Whose rarest havings made the blossoms dote; For she was sought by spirits of richest coat , But kept cold distance , and did thence remove , To spend her living in eternal love . But , O my sweet , what labour is't to leave The thing we have not , mastering what not strives , Playing the place which did no form receive , Playing patient sports in unconstrained gyves ? She that her fame so to herself contrives , The scars of battle 'scapeth by the flight , And makes her absence valiant , not her might . O , pardon me , in that my boast is true: The accident which brought me to her eye Upon the moment did her force subdue , And now she would the caged cloister fly: Religious love put out Religion's eye: Not to be tempted , would she be immured , And now , to tempt , all liberty procured . How mighty then you are , O , hear me tell ! The broken bosoms that to me belong Have emptied all their fountains in my well , And mine I pour your ocean all among: I strong o'er them , and you o'er me being strong , Must for your victory us all congest , As compound love to physic your cold breast . My parts had power to charm a sacred nun , Who , disciplined , ay , dieted in grace , Believed her eyes when they to assail begun , All vows and consecrations giving place: O most potential love ! vow , bond , nor space , In thee hath neither sting , knot , nor confine , For thou art all , and all things else are thine . When thou impressest , what are precepts worth Of stale example ? When thou wilt inflame , How coldly those impediments stand forth Of wealth , of filial fear , law , kindred , fame ! Love's arms are peace , 'gainst rule , 'gainst sense , 'gainst shame , And sweetens , in the suffering pangs it bears , The aloes of all forces , shocks , and fears . Now all these hearts that do on mine depend , Feeling it break , with bleeding groans they pine; And supplicant their sighs to you extend , To leave the battery that you make gainst mine , Lending soft audience to my sweet design , And credent soul to that strong-bonded oath That shall prefer and undertake my troth . This said , his watery eyes he did dismount , Whose sights till then were levell'd on my face; Each cheek a river running from a fount With brinish current downward flow'd apace: O , how the channel to the stream gave grace ! Who glazed with crystal gate the glowing roses That flame through water which their hue encloses . O father , what a hell of witchcraft lies In the small orb of one particular tear ! But with the inundation of the eyes What rocky heart to water will not wear ? What breast so cold that is not warmed here ? O cleft effect ! cold modesty , hot wrath , Both fire from hence and chill extincture hath . For , lo , his passion , but an art of craft , Even there resolved my reason into tears; There my white stole of chastity I daff'd , Shook off my sober guards and civil fears; Appear to him , as he to me appears , All melting; though our drops this difference bore , His poison'd me , and mine did him restore . In him a plenitude of subtle matter , Applied to cautels , all strange forms receives , Of burning blushes , or of weeping water , Or swooning paleness; and he takes and leaves , In either's aptness , as it best deceives , To blush at speeches rank to weep at woes , Or to turn white and swoon at tragic shows . That not a heart which in his level came Could 'scape the hail of his all-hurting aim , Showing fair nature is both kind and tame; And , veil'd in them , did win whom he would maim: Against the thing he sought he would exclaim; When he most burn'd in heart-wish'd luxury , He preach'd pure maid , and praised cold chastity . Thus merely with the garment of a Grace The naked and concealed fiend he cover'd; That th' unexperient gave the tempter place , Which like a cherubin above them hover . Who , young and simple , would not be so lover'd ? Ay me ! I fell; and yet do question make What I should do again for such a sake . O , that infected moisture of his eye , O , that false fire which in his cheek so glow'd , O , that forced thunder from his heart did fly , O , that sad breath his spongy lungs bestow'd , O , all that borrow'd motion seeming owed , Would yet again betray the fore-betray'd , And new pervert a reconciled maid ! Crabbed Age and Youth Cannot live together: Youth is full of pleasance , Age is full of care; Youth like summer morn , Age like winter weather; Youth like summer brave , Age like winter bare: Youth is full of sports , Age's breath is short , Youth is nimble , Age is lame: Youth is hot and bold , Age is weak and cold , Youth is wild , and Age is tame:- Age , I do abhor thee; Youth , I do adore thee; O ! my Love , my Love is young ! Age , I do defy thee- O sweet shepherd , hie thee , For methinks thou stay'st too long . O never say that I was false of heart , Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify: As easy might I from myself depart As from my soul , which in thy breast doth lie; That is my home of love; if I have ranged , Like him that travels , I return again , Just to the time , not with the time exchanged , So that myself bring water for my stain . Never believe , though in my nature reign'd All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood , That it could so preposterously be stain'd To leave for nothing all thy sum of good: For nothing this wide universe I call , Save thou , my rose: in it thou art my all . Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck , And yet methinks I have astronomy , But not to tell of good , or evil luck , Of plagues , of dearths , or seasons' quality , Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell; Pointing to each his thunder , rain and wind , Or say with princes if it shall go well By oft predict that I in heaven find . But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive , And constant stars in them I read such art As truth and beauty shall together thrive If from thy self , to store thou wouldst convert: Or else of thee this I prognosticate , Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date . O , for my sake do you with Fortune chide , The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds , That did not better for my life provide Than public means which public manners breeds . Thence comes it that my name receives a brand , And almost thence my nature is subdued To what it works in , like the dyer's hand . Pity me then , and wish I were renewed , Whilst like a willing patient I will drink Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection; No bitterness that I will bitter think , Nor double penance to correct correction . Pity me then , dear friend , and I assure ye Even that your pity is enough to cure me . Since I left you , mine eye is in my mind , And that which governs me to go about Doth part his function , and is partly blind , Seems seeing , but effectually is out; For it no form delivers to the heart Of bird , of flower , or shape which it doth latch; Of his quick objects hath the mind no part , Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch; For if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight , The most sweet-favour or deformed'st creature , The mountain or the sea , the day or night , The crow or dove , it shapes them to your feature . Incapable of more , replete with you , My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue . Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain , Lest sorrow lend me words and words express The manner of my pity-wanting pain . If I might teach thee wit , better it were , Though not to love , yet , love , to tell me so , As testy sick men , when their deaths be near , No news but health from their physicians know . For if I should despair , I should grow mad , And in my madness might speak ill of thee , Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad , Mad slanderers by mad ears believèd be . That I may not be so , nor thou belied , Bear thine eyes straight , though thy proud heart go wide . O , how thy worth with manners may I sing , When thou art all the better part of me ? What can mine own praise to mine own self bring ? And what is't but mine own when I praise thee ? Even for this let us divided live , And our dear love lose name of single one , That by this separation I may give That due to thee which thou deserv'st alone . O , absence what a torment wouldst thou prove , Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave To entertain the time with thoughts of love , Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive , And that thou teachest how to make one twain By praising him here who doth hence remain ! Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear , Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste; These vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear , And of this book , this learning mayst thou taste . The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show Of mouthèd graves will give thee memory , Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know Time's thievish progress to eternity . Look what thy memory cannot contain , Commit to these waste blanks , and thou shalt find Those children nursed , delivered from thy brain , To take a new acquaintance of thy mind . These offices , so oft as thou wilt look , Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book . Where the bee sucks , there suck I: In a cowslip's bell I lie; There I couch when owls do cry . On the bat's back I do fly . After summer merrily: Merrily , merrily , shall I live now Under the blossom that hangs on the bough . Shall I compare thee to a summer's day ? Thou art more lovely and more temperate . Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May , And summer's lease hath all too short a date . Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines , And often is his gold complexion dimm'd; And every fair from fair sometime declines , By chance or nature's changing course untrimm'd; But thy eternal summer shall not fade Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st; Nor shall Death brag thou wander'st in his shade , When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st: So long as men can breathe or eyes can see , So long lives this , and this gives life to thee . They that have power to hurt and will do none , That do not do the thing they most do show , Who , moving others , are themselves as stone , Unmoved , cold , and to temptation slow-- They rightly do inherit heaven's graces , And husband nature's riches from expense; They are the Lords and owners of their faces , Others , but stewards of their excellence . The summer's flower is to the summer sweet , Though to itself it only live and die; But if that flower with base infection meet , The basest weed outbraves his dignity: For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds; Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds . When to the Sessions of sweet silent thought I summon up remembrance of things past , I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought , And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste: Then can I drown an eye , unused to flow , For precious friends hid in death's dateless night , And weep afresh love's long-since-cancell'd woe , And moan th' expense of many a vanish'd sight: Then can I grieve at grievances foregone , And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan , Which I new pay as if not paid before . But if the while I think on thee , dear friend , All losses are restored and sorrows end . When , in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes , I all alone beweep my outcast state And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries And look upon myself and curse my fate , Wishing me like to one more rich in hope , Featur'd like him , like him with friends possess'd , Desiring this man's art and that man's scope , With what I most enjoy contented least; Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising , Haply I think on thee , and then my state , Like to the lark at break of day arising From sullen earth , sings hymns at heaven's gate; For thy sweet love remember'd such wealth brings That then I scorn to change my state with kings . Some glory in their birth , some in their skill , Some in their wealth , some in their bodies' force , Some in their garments , though new-fangled ill , Some in their hawks and hounds , some in their horse; And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure , Wherein it finds a joy above the rest: But these particulars are not my measure; All these I better in one general best . Thy love is better than high birth to me , Richer than wealth , prouder than garments' cost , Of more delight than hawks or horses be; And having thee , of all men's pride I boast: Wretched in this alone , that thou mayst take All this away and me most wretched make . O , call not me to justify the wrong That thy unkindness lays upon my heart; Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue; Use power with power and slay me not by art . Tell me thou lovest elsewhere , but in my sight , Dear heart , forbear to glance thine eye aside: What need'st thou wound with cunning when thy might Is more than my o'er-press'd defense can bide ? Let me excuse thee: ah ! my love well knows Her pretty looks have been mine enemies , And therefore from my face she turns my foes , That they elsewhere might dart their injuries: Yet do not so; but since I am near slain , Kill me outright with looks and rid my pain . My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still , While comments of your praise , richly compiled , Reserve their character with golden quill , And precious phrase by all the Muses filed . I think good thoughts , whilst other write good words , And like unlettered clerk still cry "Amen" To every hymn that able spirit affords In polished form of well-refinèd pen . Hearing you praised , I say "'Tis so , 'tis true ," And to the most of praise add something more; But that is in my thought , whose love to you , Though words come hindmost , holds his rank before . Then others for the breath of words respect , Me for my dumb thoughts , speaking in effect .   -FIN-